the segmentation process as a whole can be thought of as consisting of two tasks : recognition and delineation .
recognition is to determine roughly `` where '' the object is and to distinguish it from other object - like entities .
although delineation is the final step for defining the spatial extent of the object region / boundary in the image , an efficient recognition strategy is a key for successful delineation . in this study ,
a novel , general method is introduced for object recognition to assist in segmentation ( delineation ) tasks .
it exploits the pose relationship that can be encoded , via the concept of ball scale ( b - scale )  @xcite , between the binary training objects and their associated images .    as an alternative to the manual methods based on initial placement of the models by an expert  @xcite in the literature ,
model based methods can be employed for recognition .
for example , in @xcite , the position of an organ model ( such as liver ) is estimated by its histogram . in  @xcite ,
generalized hough transform is succesfully extended to incorporate variability of shape for 2d segmentation problem .
atlas based methods are also used to define initial position for a shape model . in  @xcite
, affine registration is performed to align the data into an atlas to determine the initial position for a shape model of the knee cartilage .
similarly , a popular particle filtering algorithm is used to detect the starting pose of models for both single and multi - object cases  @xcite . however , due to the large search space and numerous local minimas in most of these studies , conducting a global search on the entire image is not a feasible approach . in this paper
, we investigate an approach of automatically recognizing objects in 3d images without performing elaborate searches or optimization .
the proposed method consists of the following key ideas and components :    * 1 .
model building : * after aligning image data from all @xmath0 subjects in the training set into a common coordinate system via 7-parameter affine registration , the live - wire algorithm  @xcite is used to segment @xmath1 different objects from @xmath0 subjects .
segmented objects are used for the automatic extraction of landmarks in a slice - by - slice manner  @xcite . from the landmark information for all objects ,
a model assembly @xmath2 is constructed .
b - scale encoding : * the b - scale value at every voxel in an image helps to understand `` objectness '' of a given image without doing explicit segmentation . for each voxel ,
the radius of the largest ball of homogeneous intensity is weighted by the intensity value of that particular voxel in order to incorporate appearance ( texture ) information into the object information ( called intensity weighted b - scale : @xmath3 ) so that a model of the correlations between shape and texture can be built . a simple and proper way of thresholding the b - scale image yields a few largest balls remaining in the image .
these are used for the construction of the relationship between the segmented training objects and the corresponding images .
the resulting images have a strong relationship with the actual delineated objects .
relationship between @xmath2 and @xmath3 : * a principal component @xmath4 system is built via pca for the segmented objects in each image , and their mean @xmath5 system , denoted @xmath6 , is found over all training images .
@xmath6 has an origin and three @xmath5 axes .
similarly the mean @xmath5 system , denoted @xmath7 , for intensity weighted b - scale images @xmath8 is found .
finally the transformation @xmath9 that maps @xmath7 to @xmath6 is found .
given an image @xmath10 to be segmented , the main idea here is to use @xmath9 to facilitate a quick placement of @xmath2 in @xmath10 with a proper pose as indicated in step 4 below .    *
hierarchical recognition : * for a given image @xmath10 , @xmath3 is obtained and its @xmath5 system , denoted @xmath11 is computed subsequently . assuming the relationship of @xmath11 to @xmath6 to be the same as of @xmath7 to @xmath6 , and assuming that @xmath6 offers the proper pose of @xmath2 in the training images , we use transformation @xmath9 and @xmath11 to determine the pose of @xmath2 in @xmath10 .
this level of recognition is called coarse recognition . further refinement of the recognition can be done using the skin boundary object in the image with the requirement that a major portion of @xmath2 should lie inside the body region delimited by the skin boundary . moreover
, a little search inside the skin boundary can be done for the fine tuning , however , since offered coarse recognition method gives high recognition rates , there is no need to do any elaborate searches .
we will focus on the fine tuning of coarse recognition for future study .
the finest level of recognition requires the actual delineation algorithm itself , which is a hybrid method in our case and called gc - asm ( synergistic integration of graph - cut and active shape model ) .
this delineation algorithm is presented in a companion paper submitted to this symposium  @xcite .
a convenient way of achieving incorporation of prior information automatically in computing systems is to create and use a flexible _ model _ to encode information such as the expected _ size _ , _ shape _ , _ appearance _ , and _ position _ of objects in an image  @xcite . among such information ,
_ shape _ and _ appearance _ are two complementary but closely related attributes of biological structures in images , and hence they are often used to create statistical models . in particular , shape has been used both in high and low level image analysis tasks extensively , and it has been demonstrated that shape models ( such as active shape models ( asms ) ) can be quite powerful in compensating for misleading information due to noise , poor resolution , clutter , and occlusion in the images  @xcite .
therefore , we use asm  @xcite to estimate population statistics from a set of examples ( training set ) . in order to guarantee 3d point correspondences required by asm
, we build our statistical shape models combining semi - automatic methods : ( 1 ) manually selected anatomically correspondent slices by an expert , and ( 2 ) semi - automatic way of specifying key points on the shapes starting from the same anatomical locations .
once step ( 1 ) is accomplished , the remaining problem turns into a problem of establishing point correspondence in 2d shapes , which is easily solved .
it is extremely significant to choose correct correspondences so that a good representation of the modelled object results .
although landmark correspondence is usually established manually by experts , it is time - consuming , prone to errors , and restricted to only 2d objects  @xcite .
because of these limitations , a semi - automatic landmark tagging method , _ equal space landmarking _ , is used to establish correspondence between landmarks of each sample shape in our experiments .
although this method is proposed for 2d objects , and equally spacing a fixed number of points for 3d objects is much more difficult , we use equal space landmarking technique in pseudo-3d manner where 3d object is annotated slice by slice .
let @xmath12 be a single shape and assume that its finite dimensional representation after the landmarking consisting of @xmath13 landmark points with positions @xmath14 , where @xmath15 are cartesian coordinates of the @xmath16 point on the shape @xmath17 .
equal space landmark tagging for points @xmath18 for @xmath19 on shape boundaries ( contours ) starts by selecting an initial point on each shape sample in training set and equally space a fixed number of points on each boundary automatically  @xcite . selecting the starting point
has been done manually by annotating the same anatomical point for each shape in the training set .
figure  [ img : landmarking_abd ] shows annotated landmarks for five different objects ( skin , liver , right kidney , left kidney , spleen ) in a ct slice of the abdominal region .
note that different number of landmarks are used for different objects considering their size .    [ cols="^ " , ]
\(1 ) the b - scale image of a given image captures object morphometric information without requiring explicit segmentation .
b - scales constitute fundamental units of an image in terms of largest homogeneous balls situated at every voxel in the image .
the b - scale concept has been previously used in object delineation , filtering and registration .
our results suggest that their ability to capture object geography in conjunction with shape models may be useful in quick and simple yet accurate object recognition strategies .
( 2 ) the presented method is general and does not depend on exploiting the peculiar characteristics of the application situation .
( 3 ) the specificity of recognition increases dramatically as the number of objects in the model increases .
( 4 ) we emphasize that both modeling and testing procedures are carried out on the ct data sets that are part of the clinical pet / ct data routinely acquired in our hospital .
the ct data set are thus of relatively poor ( spatial and contrast ) resolution compared to other ct - alone studies with or without contrast .
we expect better performance if higher resolution ct data are employed in modeling or testing .
this paper is published in spie medical imaging conference - 2010 .
falcao , a.x . ,
udupa , j.k . ,
samarasekera , s. , sharma , s. , hirsch , b.e . , and lotufo , r.a . , 1998
user - steered image segmentation paradigms : live wire and live lane . graph .
models image process .
60  ( 4 ) , pp .
233260 .
kokkinos , i. , maragos , p. , 2009 .
synergy between object recognition and image segmentation using the expectation - maximization algorithm .
ieee transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligience , vol.31  ( 8) , pp.14861501 .
brejl , m. , sonka , m. , 2000 .
object localization and border detection criteria design in edge - based image segmentation : automated learning from examples .
ieee transactions on medical imaging , vol.19  ( 10 ) , pp.973985 .
fripp , j. , crozier , s. , warfield , s.k . ,
ourselin , s. , 2005 .
automatic initialisation of 3d deformable models for cartilage segmentation . in proceedings of digital image computing : techniques and applications , pp .